About the site
Introduction
Font test page
Help us
Frequently Asked Questions
Instructions
Tools
System Statistics
Digital humanities
Pre-Qin and Han
Confucianism
The Analects
Xue Er
Wei Zheng
Ba Yi
Li Ren
Gong Ye Chang
Yong Ye
Shu Er
Tai Bo
Zi Han
Xiang Dang
Xian Jin
Yan Yuan
Zi Lu
Xian Wen
Wei Ling Gong
Ji Shi
Yang Huo
Wei Zi
Zi Zhang
Yao Yue
Mengzi
Liji
Xunzi
Xiao Jing
Shuo Yuan
Chun Qiu Fan Lu
Han Shi Wai Zhuan
Da Dai Li Ji
Bai Hu Tong
Xin Shu
Xin Xu
Yangzi Fayan
Zhong Lun
Kongzi Jiayu
Qian Fu Lun
Lunheng
Tai Xuan Jing
Fengsu Tongyi
Kongcongzi
Shen Jian
Zhong Jing
Su Shu
Xin Yu
Du Duan
Cai Zhong Lang Ji
Mohism
Mozi
Mo Bian Zhu Xu
Daoism
Zhuangzi
Dao De Jing
Liezi
He Guan Zi
Wenzi
Wen Shi Zhen Jing
Lie Xian Zhuan
Yuzi
Heshanggong Laozi
Legalism
Hanfeizi
Shang Jun Shu
Shen Bu Hai
Shenzi
Jian Zhu Ke Shu
Guanzi
School of Names
Gongsunlongzi
School of the Military
The Art of War
Wu Zi
Liu Tao
Si Ma Fa
Wei Liao Zi
Three Strategies
Mathematics
Hai Dao Suan Jing
The Nine Chapters
Sunzi Suan Jing
Zhou Bi Suan Jing
Miscellaneous Schools
Huainanzi
Lü Shi Chun Qiu
Gui Gu Zi
Yin Wen Zi
Deng Xi Zi
Histories
Shiji
Chun Qiu Zuo Zhuan
Lost Book of Zhou
Guo Yu
Yanzi Chun Qiu
Wu Yue Chun Qiu
Yue Jue Shu
Zhan Guo Ce
Yan Tie Lun
Lie Nü Zhuan
Guliang Zhuan
Gongyang Zhuan
Han Shu
Qian Han Ji
Dong Guan Han Ji
Hou Han Shu
Zhushu Jinian
Mutianzi Zhuan
Gu San Fen
Yandanzi
Xijing Zaji
Ancient Classics
Book of Poetry
Shang Shu
Book of Changes
The Rites of Zhou
Chu Ci
Yili
Shan Hai Jing
Jiaoshi Yilin
Jingshi Yizhuan
Shi Shuo
Etymology
Shuo Wen Jie Zi
Er Ya
Shi Ming
Fang Yan
Ji Jiu Pian
Chinese Medicine
Huangdi Neijing
Nan Jing
Shang Han Lun
Jinkui Yaolue
Excavated texts
Guodian
Mawangdui
Post-Han
Wei, Jin, and North-South
Sui-Tang
Song-Ming
Three Character Classic
Romance of the Three Kingdoms
Qing
Mozi Jiangu
Hong Lou Meng
Quan Tang Shi
Kangxi Zidian
The Scholars
Republican era
Advanced
Simplified Chinese version
Show translation:[None] [Modern Chinese] [English]
Pre-Qin and Han -> Confucianism -> The Analects -> Yao Yue
English translation: James Legge [?]
Books referencing 《尧曰》
Library Resources
底本：《武英殿十三经注疏》本《论语注疏》：尧曰《钦定四库全书》本《论语精义》：尧曰《古逸丛书》本《论语》：尧曰《钦定四库全书》本《论语集说》：尧曰《读论语丛说》：尧曰《四部丛刊初编》本《论语集解》：尧曰《阮元校刻十三经注疏》本《论语注疏》：尧曰《四部丛刊初编》本《孔子家语》《论语旁证》：尧曰《湖北丛书》本《论语类考》《论语正义》《钦定四库全书》本《论语全解》《墨海金壶》本《论语笔解》《墨海金壶》本《论语意原》《钦定四库全书》本《论语集解义疏》《摛藻堂四库全书荟要》本《论语集说》《钦定四库全书》本《论语注疏》《指海》本《论语意原》《钦定篆文六经四书.论语》《钦定四库全书》本《论语意原》[Show all]
Yao Yue:
Yao said, "Oh! you, Shun, the Heaven-determined order of succession now rests in your person. Sincerely hold fast the due Mean. If there shall be distress and want within the four seas, the Heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end." Shun also used the same language in giving charge to You. Tang said, "I, the child Lu, presume to use a dark-colored victim, and presume to announce to Thee, O most great and sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, O God, I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by thy mind, O God. If, in my person, I commit offenses, they are not to be attributed to you, the people of the myriad regions. If you in the myriad regions commit offenses, these offenses must rest on my person." Zhou conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched. "Although he has his near relatives, they are not equal to my virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the One man." He carefully attended to the weights and measures, examined the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and the good government of the kingdom took its course. He revived states that had been extinguished, restored families whose line of succession had been broken, and called to office those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him. What he attached chief importance to were the food of the people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices. By his generosity, he won all. By his sincerity, he made the people repose trust in him. By his earnest activity, his achievements were great. By his justice, all were delighted.
Yao Yue:
Zi Zhang asked Confucius, saying, "In what way should a person in authority act in order that he may conduct government properly?" The Master replied, "Let him honor the five excellent, and banish away the four bad, things; then may he conduct government properly." Zi Zhang said, "What are meant by the five excellent things?" The Master said, "When the person in authority is beneficent without great expenditure; when he lays tasks on the people without their repining; when he pursues what he desires without being covetous; when he maintains a dignified ease without being proud; when he is majestic without being fierce." Zi Zhang said, "What is meant by being beneficent without great expenditure?" The Master replied, "When the person in authority makes more beneficial to the people the things from which they naturally derive benefit;-- is not this being beneficent without great expenditure? When he chooses the labors which are proper, and makes them labor on them, who will repine? When his desires are set on benevolent government, and he secures it, who will accuse him of covetousness? Whether he has to do with many people or few, or with things great or small, he does not dare to indicate any disrespect - is not this to maintain a dignified ease without any pride? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and throws a dignity into his looks, so that, thus dignified, he is looked at with awe - is not this to be majestic without being fierce?" Zi Zhang then asked, "What are meant by the four bad things?" The Master said, "To put the people to death without having instructed them - this is called cruelty. To require from them, suddenly, the full tale of work, without having given them warning - this is called oppression. To issue orders as if without urgency, at first, and, when the time comes, to insist on them with severity - this is called injury. And, generally, in the giving pay or rewards to men, to do it in a stingy way - this is called acting the part of a mere official."
Yao Yue:
The Master said, "Without recognizing the ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior man. Without an acquaintance with the rules of Propriety, it is impossible for the character to be established. Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to know men."
URN: ctp:analects/yao-yue
Enjoy this site? Please help.
Site design and content copyright 2006-2024. When quoting or citing information from this site, please link to the corresponding page or to https://ctext.org/ens. Please note that the use of automatic download software on this site is strictly prohibited, and that users of such software are automatically banned without warning to save bandwidth. 沪ICP备09015720号-3
Comments? Suggestions? Please raise them here.
